Cross-Culturalism: This the learned skill of relating to people of other cultures within the contexts of their cultures. (Van Rheenen 1996b, 105). Contrast with Monoculturalism in this same dictionary.

Conversion This implies turning from self which is in rebellion against God, turning to God through faith in the finished work of Christ on the cross, and coming into union with him through the saving blood of Jesus Christ. (Van Rheenen 2001). (2) "the change of one's social identity, the acquisition of a new conceptual language, and the shifting of one's paradigm" (Kallenberg 2002, 32).


E-1 Evangelism: evangelism "among people who speak the same general language as the missionary and have a similar cultural heritage" (Van Rheenen 1996b, 82); a term defining cultural distance in evangelism originally developed by Ralph Winter in Perspectives of the World Christian Movement (1992, B-157-75).


E-2 Evangelism: "an intermediate category between E-1 and E-3 evangelism describing Christian outreach to cultures that have some type of general similarity as that of the evangelist" (Van Rheenen 1996b, 83); a term defining cultural distance in evangelism originally developed by Ralph Winter inPerspectives of the World Christian Movement (1992, B-157-75).

E-3 Evangelism: evangelism which "takes place when missionaries teach those of a significantly different language and culture" (Van Rheenen 1996b, 83); a term defining cultural distance in evangelism originally developed by Ralph Winter in Perspectives of the World Christian Movement (1992, B-157-75).


AnchorEmic: the term developed by Kenneth Pike for an insider’s understanding of his own culture. Missionaries must learn how insiders understand their own culture (Van Rheenen 1996a, 148-49). Contrast with Etic in this same dictionary.


Evangelism: "initiation [of people] into the kingdom of God" (Abraham 1989, 13). "to practice friendship, to make disciples" (McLaren 2002, 134);"the proclamation of salvation in Christ to those who do not believe in him, calling them to repentance and conversion, announcing forgiveness of sin, and inviting them to become living members of Christ's earthly community and to begin a life of service to others in the power of the Holy Spirit" (Bosch 1991, 10-11).

AnchorEmic: the term developed by Kenneth Pike for an insider’s understanding of his own culture. Missionaries must learn how insiders understand their own culture (Van Rheenen 1996a, 148-49). Contrast with Etic in this same dictionary.

Faith: "a confidence in the person of Jesus Christ and His power, so that even when His power does not serve my end, my confidence in Him remains because of who He is.  Faith for the Christian is the response of trust based on who Jesus Christ claimed to be, and it results in a life that brings both mind and heart in a commitment of love to Him" (Zacharias 2000, 58).Here’s a friendly reminder message you could send:

AnchorGerminal Churches: churches which "grow geometrically (2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, etc.) . . . . like rabbits in Australia, bananas in Bermuda, and papayas in fertile areas of tropical Africa."  These are contrasted withterminal churches which "may have spiritual vitality but can reproduce only arithmetically (2, 4, 6,8, 10, 12, etc.). " (Van Rheenen 1996b, 149). Contrast with Terminal Churches in this same dictionary.


AnchorHouse Churches: "small bodies of approximately 10-30 believers meeting in homes or storefronts, which (unlike cell groups) are generally not organized under a single authority or hierarchy of authorities" (Garrison 1999, 59).  Contrast to cell churches in this same dictionary.


Indigenous Church: "a native church. . . which shares the life of the country in which it is planted and finds itself ready to govern itself, support itself, and reproduce itself" (Hodges 1953, 7); the perspective of Hodges and Smalley that a mature church must not only fulfill the traditional Three-Self Formula but must also be culturally and theologically rooted in the culture in which it finds itself (Van Rheenen 1996b, 186).

Managerial Missiology: "the belief that missions can be approached like a business problem.  With the right inputs, the thinking goes, the right outcomes can be assured.  Any number of approaches have been  haled as the 'key' to world evangelization or to reaching particular groups -- everything from contextualization to saturation evangelization.  Most while successful up to a point, also have been shown to have limits" (Guthrie 2000,162, cf. Escobar 2000, 109-112).

Missio Dei:  "mission is not the invention, responsibility, or program of human beings, but flows from the character and purposes of God. . . .  Mission is defined, directed, energized, and accompanied by God"(Murray 2001, 39).

Missiology: "the conscious, intentional, ongoing reflection on the doing of mission.  It includes theory(ies) of mission, the study and teaching of mission, as well as the research, writing, and publication of works regarding mission"(Neely 2000, 633).  "1. the study of the salvation activities of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit throughout the world geared toward bringing the kingdom of God into existence, 2. the study of the worldwide church's divine mandate to be ready to serve this God who is aiming his saving acts toward this world"(Verkuyl 1978, 5).

Mission: "the work of God in reconciling sinful humankind to himself" (Van Rheenen 1996b, 20).

Missional:  "formed by the calling and sending of God (missio Dei); "reflecting God's redemptive reign in Christ" (kingdom of God); "Trinitarian:  God-inspired, Christ-formed, Spirit-led;" practitioners "begin theologically and then move to cultural analysis and strategy formation;" not primarily driven by "what works" but by "the will of God."  (Van Rheenen, 2005b).

Missional Churches:  "reproducing communities of authentic disciples, being equipped as missionaries sent by God, to live and proclaim His Kingdom in this world" (Minatrea 2004, 8).

Missions: "the plans of committed believers to accomplish the mission of God" (Van Rheenen 1996b, 20).


Motives of Missions: "heart impulses and allegiances that lead missionaries and ministers into action and sometimes result in inaction" (Van Rheenen 1996b, 37).

New Religious Movements: "primary religious groups/movements that operate apart from the dominant religious culture in which they are located and, in addition, seek adherents from their new host culture....  Each operates out of a basically different religious myth than that of the dominant culture"(Melton 2000, 8).

Paternalism: the dominance of the sending culture over the mission process(Van Rheenen 1996b, 181-82).

People Movements:  "phenomenon of a significant number of the people of one tribe, class, or caste converting to Christ together"(Hesselgrave in Moreau 2000, 743).

Protestant Ethic: the perspective, first proposed by Max Weber in The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism in 1905, that the Protestant values of personal discipline, hard work, frugality, and respect for learning foster economic development.  "The new Evangelicalism in Latin America exhibits these values in virtually crystalline purity." (Adapted from Berger 1999, 16-17).

Reentry Shock: This is the cultural disorientation experienced when people return to their own country.  It is based upon the fact that both they and their home culture have significantly changed during their time on the missions field. 

Strategy: "the practical working out of the will of God within a cultural context" (Van Rheenen 1996b, 140); "the practice of model formation for ministry shaped by theological reflection, cultural analysis, and historical perspective and by the continued practice of ministry " (Van Rheenen 2003, Monthly Missiological Reflection #26).


Strategy Coordinator (as defined by the Southern Baptist Convention): "a missionary who takes responsibility for developing a comprehensive plan aimed at initiating and nurturing a Church Planting Movement among an unreached people group or population segment" (Garrison 1999, 60).


Tentmaking: "the marketplace ministry of effective Christians in cross-cultural contexts," preferably called kingdom professionals because "tentmaking" has the connotations of "financial strategy" rather than "the people of God using the gifts of God . . . for the works of God" (Ginter in Guthrie, 2000, 119).

Three-Self Formula: the theory of church maturation promoted by Rufus Anderson and Henry Venn during the last half of the nineteenth century advocating that "young churches on the mission field would gain their independence on the basis of the principles of self-propagation, self-support, and self-government" (Van Rheenen, 1996b, 182).



AnchorTerminal Churches: churches which "may have spiritual vitality but can reproduce only arithmetically (2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, etc.).  Missionaries are teaching others but not training their converts to become reproductive; they are initiating churches but not preparing leaders of these churches to plant other churches" (Van Rheenen 1996b, 148). Contrast with Germinal Churches in this same dictionary.


AnchorTheology of Mission: 1. "a multidisciplinary field that reads the Bible with missiological eyes and, based on that reading, continually reexamines, reevaluates and redirects the church's participation in God's mission in God's world" (Van Engen, Thomas, & Gallagher 1999, xviii). 2. "Engaging God's redemptive purposes through biblical studies, prayer, and reflection to inform, motivate, and ethically guide Christians in reconciling to God those lost in sin.  A theology of missions serves to help the missionary understand the purposes of God so that He can be guided by them, furnishes the motivation to carry out God's mission, provides the content of the message preached, sustains the missionary during times of difficulty, and guides missionaries to ethically evaluate the practices and methodologies of missions" (Van Rheenen, Class Lecture in Foundations of Missiology, Fall 2000).

AnchorUnreached People: "a people group among which there is no indigenous community of believing Christians with adequate numbers and resources to evangelize this people group without requiring outside assistance" (EFTA in Van Rheenen 1996b, 208); "the two billion people who have never heard of Jesus as Savior, and are not within reach of Christians of their own people:(Bush in Van Rheenen 1996b, 209)

Vulnerable Mission:  "ministry carried out using the resources and language(s) of the people being reached, as against foreign resources and languages"  (Email from Jim Harries; www.vulnerablemission.com).


Witness: "an overarching term drawing together proclamation (kerygma),community (koinonia), and service (diakonia)" defining "evangelistic ministry, as the core of ministry" (Guder 2000, 53).




Abolitionist Movement.
Academic Associations of Mission.

Accommodation. Missionary practice of accommodating
the rituals, practices, and styles of the
missionary’s sending church to those of the recipient
culture. It indicates what are generally
conscious processes of adaptation, done with the
willingness to adopt some of the forms of the receiving
culture and at times to leave aside some
of the prior Christian church’s customs considered
to be an impediment to embracing Christian
faith in the receiving culture.

Accreditation. A procedure for certifying the appropriateness
of an educational institution and
its instructional programs; also, the recognition
awarded to an institution or program thus certified.
In missions, accreditation often refers to
certification of theological education in the Third
World.


Adjustment to the Field. Rapid, authentic adjustment
to the field is an important key to effective
cross-cultural communication of the Christian
faith. During preparation, and especially on
arrival, the missionary family must be aware of
this challenge. The problems of adjustment must
be anticipated and then positively experienced.


Agricultural Missions. Agriculture is the main
means of livelihood for 65 percent to 90 percent
of the population in most African, Asian, and
Latin American countries. Even for industrialized
countries such as the United Kingdom,
where farmers represent less than 2 percent of
the workforce, agricultural mission is vitally
needed.


mbassador of God. A missionary’s task is to
represent God and his message to an alien world.
This shows the special relationship between the
Creator and the messenger, who is dispatched as
an envoy, an ambassador of God. An ambassador
is an official diplomatic agent of high rank who
is sent out by a ruler or government as a public
representative. A missionary is one who is sent
out to work as a citizen of the KINGDOM OF Gop,
representing truth and light in a world of deceit
and darkness.


Anthropology, Missiological Anthropology.



Attrition. Departure from field service by missionaries,
regardless of the cause. There are two
general categories. Unpreventable attrition (understandable
or acceptable) includes retirement,
completion of a contract, medical leave, or a legitimate
call to another place or ministry. Preventable
attrition occurs “when missionaries,
because of mismanagement, unrealistic expectations,
systemic abuse, personal failure, or
other personal reasons, leave the field before the
mission or church feels that they should. In so
doing, missionaries may reflect negatively on
themselves, but of greater concern is the negative
impact on the specific mission structure and
the cause of world missions” (Taylor, 1997, 18).



Behavior Patterns. Christian missionaries have
always concerned themselves with the behavior
of other peoples. Disobedience to even the most
basic of God’s laws constitutes evidence of their
sinful condition. Prescribed behavioral change
affords evidence of their conversion. However,
with the development of the social sciences, German
missiology since the latter part of the nineteenth
century and American missiology since
World War II have reflected increased understanding
of human behavior.


Calvinism. A system of doctrine and an historical
phenomenon. As a doctrinal system, Calvinism
stresses certain truths that have a clear bearing
on mission, three of which stand out.



Candidacy. That time in the missions realm that
parallels the engagement period in the realm of
marriage. Before someone becomes part of a
mission agency, both the agency and the individual
must determine that compatibility exists. The
period in which that is being evaluated is known
as candidacy. Both the individual and the agency
have expressed real interest, but neither has
made a formal or final commitment.


Candidate Selection. Statisticians estimate that
there are over 144,000 missionaries worldwide
and that this number of cross-cultural Christian
workers will continue to grow. They note that
this burgeoning missionary force will come increasingly
from non-Western countries.


Charismatic Missions. The charismatic movement,
also known as the charismatic renewal and
Neo-Pentecostalism, is a worldwide revival movement,
an extension of the Pentecostal revival that
began around the turn of the century (see PENTECOSTAL
MOVEMENT). While charismatics tend to
emphasize the gifts of healing, prophecy, and
words of knowledge over tongues, the distinction
between the two movements remains blurred.


Christology . Every facet of biblical Christology
could be tied to mission, in that the biblical plotline
that sets out God’s mission to redeem from a
lost race a vast number from every tongue and
tribe and people and nation is focused on Jesus
Christ, without whom the missionary plotline
would be incoherent.


Church Development. Evangelical missions
have always emphasized personal evangelism
and starting churches (congregations) as their
basic purpose. This dual purpose was formalized,
and technically analyzed, in the 1960s by the appearance
of what came to be known as the
CHURCH GROWTH MOVEMENT, initiated and pioneered
by DONALD ANDERSON McGavraNn. A science
of church planting and church development
resulted that has complemented the perennial
emphasis of missions on personal evangelism.
Church growth theory says that personal evangelism
is incomplete if it does not gather the converts
in congregations which, in turn, know how
to multiply themselves. Therefore, the multiplication
of churches (local congregations) is the
best, and fastest, way to evangelize the world.


Church Growth Movement. Church growth is
that discipline which investigates the nature, expansion,
planting, multiplication, function, and
health of Christian churches as they relate to the
effective implementation of God’s commission to
“make disciples of all peoples” (Matt. 28:19-20).
Students of church growth strive to integrate the
eternal theological principles of God’s Word concerning
the expansion of the church with the best
insights of contemporary social and behavioral
sciences, employing as the initial frame of reference
the foundational work done by DoNaLp Mc-
GAVRAN.


Church Missions Conferences. The widespread
sponsorship of mission conferences by local
churches reflects the significant role played by
the local church in world missions. Although the
primary purpose of church mission conferences
is educational, they are also used as a catalyst
for increasing prayer and financial support for
missionaries.


Church Polity. Missiologists have noted that in
one way or another Christians in every generation
have debated the relationship of church government
structure and mission. As A. F. GLASSER
notes, the question at issue is, “What is the relation
between the church’s structured congregations,
ruled by its ecclesiastical authorities, and
those mission structures within its life directed
by others, whether voluntary or authorized,
whereby the gospel is shared with non-Christians
and new congregations are planted?”




CHURCH PLANTING
Colonialism and Missions.



Colportage. The practice of selling or giving
away small portions of Scripture or gospel tracts.
The idea (and word) comes from France, where
col (neck) and porter (to carry) were combined to
refer to peddlers who carried packs of their
wares for sale around the countryside. According
to the Oxford English Dictionary, the term was
used in English by 1796. Providing an alternative
to those who had no access to bookstores or
other outlets for religious literature, colporteurs
were employed by missionary agencies (especially
Bible Societies) and traveled mostly rural
areas selling or trading for their products.

Comity. A concept derived from the general principle
that mission groups ought not to compete
with one another. The method used to promote
this concept was to make one agency responsible
for evangelism in a particular territory or among
a particular people. Double occupancy of a region,
with the exception of big cities, was to be
avoided.
Historically

Commitment. Commitment, when used in the
context of missions, evokes a picture of the last
session of a missions conference in which someone
responds to the call for missionary volunteers.
But biblical commitment is much broader
and deeper than that. It is the mark of every true
disciple: unconditional commitment to the lordship
of Jesus Christ. That means all of life—vocation,
possessions, relationships, talk, play—is
fully at God’s disposal. And since God loves the
world, the true disciple will too. So every member
of the body is supposed to be a world Christian.
If not, someone is in rebellion or ignorant.
But biblical commitment is not just passive—it is
proactive, an eager listening for God's call, a
searching for God’s will, an involvement in God's
cause of world evangelism whatever the location
or vocation.



Communication. Communication is the missionary
problem par excellence. The word comes
from the Latin word communis (common). In
order to fulfill the GrEaT CoMMISSION a “commonality”
must be established with the various
peoples of the world—a commonality that makes
it possible for them to understand and embrace
the gospel of Christ. Accordingly, when HENDRICK
KRAEMER sought to place questions having to do
with the missionary task in a “wider and deeper
setting” than that afforded by alternative words,
he chose the word “communication.”


Contingency Plans. As commercial and governmental
communities protect themselves against
TERRORISM, the evangelical mission community
has become a preferred target for terrorist
threats, kidnapping, and extortion demands.
Contingency planning is a process by which these
potential risks are identified and prioritized as to
possibility and consequence. It is a technical
term asking the question, “What if?” and then answering
it.

Cross-Cultural Counseling. Cross-cultural counseling,
often referred to as multicultural, intercultural,
transcultural, or ethnic counseling, occurs
when the counselor's basic background
differs from that of the counselee’s. Prior to the
1970s most counselor training programs, primarily
Western value-laden, paid little attention to
cultural awareness, thereby increasing the risk of
culturally inappropriate interventions in the few
cases where such counseling took place.




Cultural Conversion. Conversion of a people
from one culture to another. It is contrasted by
Charles Kraft with “Christian conversion,” defined
as the biblically advocated yet culturally appropriate
conversion of persons from their old allegiance
to an allegiance to Christ.



The Cultural Mandate. The expression “cultural
mandate” refers to God’s command to Adam and
Eve to “rule over” creation (Gen. 1:28), meaning
to share with God in the management of all that
he had made. This mandate was issued before
the Fall occurred (Gen. 3), and obviously it predates
the missionary mandate (the GREAT Com-
MISSION; Matt. 28:18—-20). The cultural mandate
remains in force and its implications for Christian
mission are important.


Culture Shock. The concept of culture shock
was brought into prominence in missionary circles
by the reprinting in the journal Practical Anthropology
of Kalervo Oberg’s pioneering articles
entitled, “Cultural Shock: Adjustment to New
Cultural Environments.” In this article the condition
is described as the result of “losing all our familiar
signs and symbols of social intercourse” as
we interact in a foreign cultural environment.
Culture shock is the condition, experienced by
nearly everyone at the start of life in a different
culture, in which one feels off balance, unable to
predict what people's reactions will be when one
does or says something. It is a real psychological
response to very real perceptions and must be
taken seriously.




Deputation. In the deputation process initial
missionary appointees visit churches and other
gatherings of Christians to present their ministry
for the purpose of developing prayer and financial
support to underwrite missionary endeavors.
This procedure is found in independent missions
and many evangelical denominations in contrast
to denomination mission boards that are usually
funded through a unified budget not requiring
missionaries to raise their own support. There
are certain variations. The CHRISTIAN AND MIs-
SIONARY ALLIANCE requires missionaries to minister
in churches and district conferences to help
raise funds for the mission, but not for personal
support. OVERSEAS MISSIONARY FELLOWSHIP asks
appointees to seek out prayer support but not to
ask for funds. The origin of this term is related to
the appointment of deputies (assistants) to stand
in with the sheriff and his posse to accomplish a
Devanandan, Paul David
task, just as the supporters choose to stand in
prayer and financial commitment to assist in the
missionary’s ministry.







































Glossary of Missions Terminology
These terms have been mainly collected from www.strategicnetwork.org and www.urbana.org
and have been compiled to work in harmony with the Missions: An Adventure In Faith bible
studies by John Edmiston.



10/40 Window: The area of the world between 10 and 40 degrees latitude north of the equator that
stretches from Northwest Africa across the Near and Middle East and Asia. It is in this part of the world that
an overwhelming majority of the people groups are considered to be unreached with the Gospel.
Advocacy. The process of taking the part of a particular unevangelized population segment, and continually
seeking opportunities to present their case for a larger share of Christian resources.
Affiliated Christians. Church members; all persons belonging to or connected with organized churches,
whose names are inscribed, written, or entered on the churches' books, records, or rolls.
Alien Christians scale. A computed scale from 0-10 measuring culturally alien Christian influence on a
people or other segment by estimating the number of Christians from other cultures who reside on its
territory.
Biblical Mandate: Woven throughout God's Word is a redemptive thread which reveals God's heart is to
bring all peoples, nations and tongues to salvation through faith in Jesus Christ. The mandate or command
is for every believer to be involved in this process of taking the message of the Gospel to the nations (see
Genesis 12:1-3; Psalm 96:3; Matthew 28:18-20; Mark 16:15; Luke 24:45-49; John 20:21; Acts 1:8).
Candidate: Someone who has applied to a mission agency. The candidate secretary is the one who
corresponds with people who apply to a mission. Some agencies gather candidates interested in career
service at a week or two of candidate school to orient them to the agency and to evaluate each candidate for
acceptance. Once accepted by the mission board the candidate is called an appointee.

Christians. Followers of Jesus Christ of all kinds: all traditions and confessions, and all degrees of
commitment.
Christian world. In the 3-tier schema, this is World C, consisting of all who individually are Christians.
Christopaganism: A mix of Christian and non-Christian beliefs; See syncretism.
Church planting: Starting new churches
Closed country. A country whose government or regime has closed it to some major form of Christian
ministry from outside, usually resident foreign missionaries, visiting evangelists, or freely distributed
Scriptures, Christian literature, tapes or videos or films, or other Christian influences from outside.
Closing country. A country still open to outside Christian influences but whose increasing restrictions
suggest it will become closed within a few months or years.
Closure. The concept that the mandate of the church for world mission can be completed in a measurable
way by evangelizing and/or reaching all peoples on Earth; not effectively invoked unless attached to some
sort of deadline, the usual one being in the 1980s and 1990s being AD 2000.
Contextualization: Putting the truths of God into the context of the local culture. This involves seeing how
one's own culture distorts your understanding of biblical truths, and then taking the universal truths and
applying them in another culture.
Convergency. A concept describing the unstructured way in which the world evangelization thrusts of 7
major ecclesiastical traditions (Roman Catholic, Orthodox, Ecumenical, Evangelical, Catholic Charismatic,
Pentecostal-Charismatic, Fundamentalist) have converged since 1970 in stated aims, goals, terminology,
theology, missiology, publications, periodicals, activities, cooperation, and programs.
Country. A term covering both sovereign nations and nonsovereign territories or dependencies or colonies
which are not integral parts of larger parent nations.
Cross-cultural mission scale. A computed scale from 0-10 measuring the influence of cross-cultural
missionary presence and activity within a people group or other segment.
Culture: The learned and shared behavior, attitudes, feelings, values and beliefs of a people. It includes
everything that a group of people thinks, says, does and makes. This cultural package is transmitted from
generation to generation.
Deputation: Commonly refers to the prayer and financial support rallying that career and short-term
missionaries do before leaving for the field and during furloughs
Discipleship scale. A computed scale from 0-10 measuring Christian discipleship in a population segment
by estimating the number of disciples.
E%. A computed estimate of the percentage of persons in a particular population segment (world, country,
people, city) who have become evangelized.
Ethnolinguistic people. An ethnic or racial group within a single country, speaking its own language or
mother tongue.
Evangelism. The church's organized activity of spreading the gospel.
Evangelization. (a) The whole process of spreading the good news of the Kingdom of God; (b) the extent to
which the good news has been spread; (c) the extent of awareness of Christianity, Christ, and the gospel.
Evangelize. To spread the good news of Christ, with signs following, to preach, to persuade, to win for
Christ.
Evangelized non-Christian world. In the 3-tier schema, this is World B, consisting of all non-Christians
who have nevertheless become evangelized.
Evangelized persons. Individuals who have had adequate opportunity or opportunities to hear the gospel
and to respond to it.
Evangelizer. A Christian who is active regularly in witness, evangelism, and winning others to Christ.
"Force for Evangelism". The effective evangelizing nucleus in the church, made up of active Great
Commission Christians who are engaged in some form of evangelizing.
"Force for Evangelization". The total of all practising church members (their practice having various direct
and indirect influences on evangelization).
Frontier Missionary. A full-time foreign missionary who works among an unreached people or an
unevangelized population segment.
Frontier People. An alternate term for an unreached minipeople.
Global Desk. A central office within a Great Commission Agency charged with keeping the agency
accountable to its goals as they relate to the unevangelized world, networking with other Great Commission
Christians, and maintaining a clear electronic link with other global desks.
Global Evangelization Movement. A term describing the vast number of distinct agencies and plans
directed towards world evangelization which have proliferated across the world since the year 1900.
Global Mission. The mission of Jesus Christ as it involves the entire world.
Global Plan. A global plan to evangelize the world is defined here as a documented, christocentric plan or
proposal or purpose or program or scenario or similar variety that presupposes or starts from one or more of
10 central biblical themes (Great Commission, obedience of The Twelve Apostles, discipling the nations,
global mission, worldwide witness and evangelism, world evangelization, End-times, Antichrist, Parousia,
Millennium), which then articulates concern for the world's entire population, demonstrated in a call or
appeal to Christians to implement or envision a plan with a number of concrete elements in it, which plan
has adequate global significance by virtue either of its timing, or its context, or its novelty, or its appeal, or its
persuasiveness, or its impact, or uniqueness of any of its elements, or its global size in cases where its
sponsoring organization has work in over 50 nations of the world, or sends out over 5,000 foreign missionary
personnel.
Global Statistics. Numbers, cyphers, and series of figures describing any aspect of the world, the Earth,
our globe, its populations, its problems, its past, its present, and its future.
Globalist. A specialist in globalistics, one who consistently takes the global view and emphasizes the bigpicture approach to world problems.
Globalistics. The professional study of the world in its entirety, with all its peoples, groupings, problems,
and possibilities.
Globalized Mission. Mission agencies which profess to work for global mission, which utilize a veneer of
global terminology, and which operate in budget-program isolation from other missions.
Globalized Evangelization. An organized attempt by a church or mission agency to reach the world by
taking a successful local program of mission and evangelism and adding to it a veneer of global terminology.
Great Commission (used as an adjective). A descriptive term for persons or organizations or plans or
activities of any nationality, denomination, or confession, and which are based on Christ's Great Commission
and which are actively working to obey it, personally and corporately.
Great Commission agency. A church or parachurch or service agency which publicizes its raison d'etre as
obedience to Christ's Great Commission.
Great Commission Christians. Believers in Jesus Christ who are aware of the implications of Christ's
Great Commission, who have accepted its personal challenge in their lives, and who are seeking to
influence the Body of Christ to implement it.
Hidden People. An alternate term for an unreached minipeople.
Idiom. A language whose speech community regards it as their mother tongue and which shares less than
95% common vocabulary with any other idiom.
Idol: Something considered to be sacred or holy; an abode of a spirit.
Idolatry: The practice of elevating created things to the place of God; the worship of substitutes instead of
the true God.
Indigenous people: Culturally distinct groups that have occupied a region longer than other immigrant or
colonist groups.
KGAP. Kaleidoscopic global action plan, built on the 2,000 existing global and non-global plans and
attempts in part to deal with gaps in coverage of the unevangelized world.
Language Set. A grouping of language units sharing from 35-75% common vocabulary.
Language Unit. A grouping of idioms whose speech communities share from 75-95% common vocabulary.
Lexicostatistics. The study of languages by comparing lexicons (word lists) and finding how many words
are shared in common by 2 or more languages.
Limited-Access Country. A country whose government or regime limits access by aliens foreign
missionaries wishing to reside, usually by small or decreasing quotas or shorter residence permits.
Macro Region. UN definition of continent, dividing world into 8 such regions; previously named continental
areas.
Macro Segment. A major population sub-grouping used in detailing the remaining unfinished task.
Magic: The manipulation of spiritual power through rituals which compel supernatural powers to act in
certain ways.
Matching Up. The process of linking a particular unevangelized population segment with a particular
nonresidential missionary whose vocation it would be to see that the segment becomes evangelized by AD
2000.
Megapeople. An ethnolinguistic people speaking a single mother tongue whose population numbers over
one million.
Metropeople. An ethnolinguistic people resident in, and forming a distinct homogenous group in a
metropolis.
Micropeople. A small close-knit homogeneous population segment.
Micro Segment. A minor population subgrouping used for local targeting in evangelization.
Minipeople. The largest people group within which the gospel can spread as a church-planting movement
without encountering barriers of understanding or acceptance.
Ministry Options. A list of possible or potential ministries or missionary or evangelistic approaches that a
nonresidential missionary draws up, which he considers could be undertaken by various agents and
agencies on behalf or his target segment.
Missiological breakthrough. A term employed as a synonym to minimum mission achievement, which in
turn rests on Donald McGavran's well known concept of the basic, essential need for a people movement to
Christ in a given culture.
Monovocational. In contrast to bivocational persons (describing tentmakers or missionaries with the dual
vocation of (a) a secular profession in a closed country, undertaken in order to exercise (b) part-time
Christian witness or service), monovocational persons describes missionaries whose main or only vocation
and profession is full-time Christian service with particular emphasis on the ministry of evangelization.
Monitoring. The process of regularly tracking and recording the progress of evangelization in a particular
unevangelized population segment, with special reference to measuring the impact of all Great Commission
activities and influences.
Mother Tongue. The first language spoken in an individual's home in his early or earliest childhood; one's
first language or native language.
Nonresidential Missionary. This concept describes a full-time, appointed, salaried or supported
professional career missionary of any nationality, who is assigned by his or her board or agency in any
country-through a matching process designed to concentrate on the priorities of first-time evangelization and
to avoid gaps or inadvertent duplications with other agencies-to a ministry to one single unevangelized
population segment of the unevangelized world (one metropolis, one people group, or one country). He
resides with his family outside that segment or its country and is based in an open city with good
international communications facilities for networking with all other concerned Great Commission Christians
who are targeting the same segment, with the overarching objective of seeing to it that all persons in his
population segment become evangelized by AD 2000.
Overarching Objective. The long-term goal, over and above all short-term discipling or evangelistic
endeavors, of giving every person in every people group and population on Earth the opportunity to hear the
gospel with understanding and to become disciples of Christ by the year 2000.
People or People Group. A significantly large grouping of individuals who perceive themselves to have a
common affinity for one another because of their shared language, religion, ethnicity, residence, occupation,
class or caste, situation, etc. or combination of these. Examples of people groups are ethnolinguistic
peoples, minipeoples or unimax peoples, micropeoples, metropeoples, and sociopeoples.
Note: This definition which was a result of a meeting of mission executives in Chicago in March of 1982,
originally included the phrase "From the viewpoint of evangelization this is the largest group in which the
gospel can spread as a church-planting movement without encountering barriers of understanding or
acceptance." We prefer to preserve this concept through other labels (unimax group or minipeople) thus
allowing the term people group to have a broader meaning including all the other types of peoples listed
above.
Polygamy: Marriage to more than one husband or wife simultaneously.
Population Segment. An expanded term for segment, emphasizing its composition as a population.
Power encounter: A confrontation between traditional powers and the power of God in some visible way,
so that the supreme power is readily evident.
R%. A computed estimate of the percentage of persons in a country or other population segment who have
become reached.
Reached. Having heard the gospel, understood it, and having had the opportunity to respond by joining an
indigenous church or fellowship of his own culture.
Reached Minipeople. A minipeople with a viable indigenous church.
Reached People. An ethnolinguistic people with a viable indigenous church.
Reached Persons. Individuals who have had an adequate opportunity to hear the gospel and to respond to
it, and also to contact a church of their own culture and to meet and join in fellowship with other believers.
Redemptive Analogy: A story or ritual in a society that provides an analogy with some aspect of the gospel
message and so facilitates communication.
Restricted-Access Country. A country whose government or regime restricts access by foreign
missionaries wishing to reside, foreign Christians wishing to visit, or foreign Christian literature, broadcasting
or other Christian ministries or influences.
Scripture language. A language in which some Scripture activity exists, either distributing of complete
scriptures (complete Books of the Bible) in print, radio, audio, or video versions; or partial scriptures,
(ongoing translation and preparation of complete scriptures, or use of selections of texts in print, radio, or
audio versions).
Segment. Any subdivision of the world's population (homogeneous or not), made for purposes of
understanding and analysis; the most generalized English translation of the biblical Greek word ethnos
(usually translated "people").
Segmentization. The process of dividing the world's population into meaningful small segments-usually
countries, people groups, or cities-in order to assist with their targeting and evangelization.
Sociopeople. A people or population group defined primarily by some sociological category such as class,
caste, occupation, age, abode; often regarded as a useful bridge people for evangelism.
standalone. This adjective as used here does not refer to individuals but to agencies or global plans which
operate organizationally unrelated to the rest of the Great Commission World, i.e. with budget and program
unrelated to those of other agencies; also used of a computer which serves only its immediate user without
being linked or networked to other computers.
Statistics. The shortest and most compact form of factual description with regard to a population or
situation.
Superstition: Beliefs and practices that are only partly believed in by the people but continue to be held.
Support: The finances and prayer you will need to ask others to give for your mission trip. A supporter is
one who gives and prays. A support team is the group of people who supports you. They may or may not
know each other
Syncretism: A blending of two or more irreconcilable systems of belief and practice; the incompatible
mixture of biblical truth with unbiblical beliefs and practices.
Tentmaker: A cross-cultural witness who works at a paying, usually secular, job. Often they are able to gain
entry into "closed" countries which restrict traditional mission efforts. Tentmakers rarely make tents for a
living, like the apostle Paul did, but they all should have the intention to further God's work.
Term Can refer to the length of a missionary's time commitment to a mission organization. Many career
missionaries serve successive terms of two to five years. Often they spend a period of months in their home
countries between terms, usually called a furlough. A short-term can be as short as two weeks or as long as
three years.

The Field Short for the mission field. A field is anywhere that missionaries do their work. Regrettably, field
sounds like it's out in the country or on a farm. Most mission situations are not farms, and are usually
urbanized to some extent. A field director is one who oversees those who are working together in a
particular country, people group, or location.
Third World. Developing nations not politically aligned with either the Western (Capitalist) world or the
Communist (Marxist) world.
Three (3)-Tier Schema. A stylized schematic representation in which, to enhance the understanding of
world evangelization, the globe is divided into 3 slices or tiers or worlds and given the names World A, the
Unevangelized World; World B, the Evangelized Non-Christian World; and World C, the Christian World.
U%. A computed estimate of the percentage of persons in a particular population segment (world, country,
people group, city) who are unevangelized; equivalent to 100-E%.
Unevangelized Persons. Individuals who have had no adequate opportunity to hear the gospel or respond
to it; persons who are unaware of Christianity, Christ, and the gospel; those who have never heard the name
of Jesus.
Unevangelized Population Segment A measurable population community, or an evangelistically
manageable population bloc, capable of being targeted by a missionary or couple with a view to its
evangelization.
Unevangelized World. In the 3-tier schema, this is World A, consisting of all non-Christians who have not
been evangelized.
Unfinished Task. The remaining task of the Christian church on Earth viewed as the church's responsibility
within God's plan for the world; usually viewed as completing the fulfillment of Christ's Great Commission.
Unimax People. An alternate term for minipeople.
Unreached. Having never heard the gospel nor having had the opportunity to contact an indigenous church
or fellowship of his own culture.
Unreached People. An ethnolinguistic people who do not have their own viable indigenous church.
Unreached Minipeople. A minipeople with no viable indigenous church.
Unreached Persons. Individuals who have, or have had, no adequate opportunity to hear the gospel, or to
respond to it, or to meet and have fellowship with other believers.
V%. A computed estimate of the percentage of persons in a country or other population segment who are
unreached equivalent to 100-R%.
Vehicular Megalanguage. A language with a million or more speakers which acts as a trade language or
lingua franca.
Viable Indigenous Church. Within an ethnolinguistic people or a minipeople, an indigenous community of
believing Christians with adequate numbers and resources to evangelize their own people group without
necessitating outside (cross-cultural) assistance.
World Evangelization. The term used for the goal of reaching the entire world with the gospel of Christ, or
of giving every people group and population on Earth the opportunity to heat the gospel with understanding
and to become disciples of Christ.
World A. In the 3-tier schema of the Earth, the unevangelized world, i.e. the world of all unevangelized
individuals.
World B. In the 3-tier schema of the Earth, the evangelized non-Christian world, i.e. all non-Christians who
have nevertheless become evangelized.
World C. In the 3-tier schema of the Earth, the Christian world, i.e. the world of all who individually are
Christians.
Worldview: A set of presuppositions which we hold (consciously or unconsciously) about the basic make-up
of our world; the central assumptions, beliefs, concepts, premises and values which are shared by a
community. Because of the widespread acceptance of these assumptions within the society, the ideas are
usually regarded as being nonnegotiable and beyond dispute. Worldview has been compared to glasses
through which a community of people views reality. For example, if a people holds beliefs that a spiritual
realm controls natural events (animism), they will draw different conclusions about an event from someone
who does not believe in a supernatural realm.
 
